    Give without intention to get - the other day I did all of my chores and my wifes weekly chores and bought her favorite dessert. Did it kill an afternoon? Sure. Has she been in an awesome mood ever since (1 week later). You betcha. I had no idea nor did I really care if she would reciprocate or want sex or whatnot but she is just an overall much happier person right now.

    Take time to listein and understand - sitting down and letting her vent if shes in a bad mood. She will probably say something like, you probably dont even care. Thats when you reinforce that you truly do care. Its like with your boss almost, you may not care about a topic that they talk about, but its important to them, and therefore important to you.

    Cuddle - sometimes just because, without intention of anything else happening. Just a nice rub of the shoulders and holding each other tightly. Its showing love rather than just saying.

    Compliment - take the time to compliment BEFORE prompted. Hey babe that dress really looks nice on you, as shes getting ready. I really like how you did that eye liner thing last time we went out, as she is doing her makeup. Show her how much you appreciate the effort that she puts in.

    Ask for opinions - this kind of goes along with listeining. Many time guys get gung ho and start just doing shit. Take the time, especially if its a two person project to get her opinion. Start with something like "i think we should do x. What do you think?" Instead of "this is how we are going to/this is how it should be done"







    It's not you versus her in anything. It's the both of you against the problem. To men who tend to look for solutions in all things, miscommunication can be the problem. Sometimes you shouldn't go into problem solving mode if that itself creates problems between you. She may just want someone to vent to, to commiserate with, or to take her side. If you've had a miscommunication it's not you're right and she's wrong or vice versa, both your perspectives are valid and you need to figure out how the both of you can work together to prevent that in the future.

    Go to bed angry, wake up and talk it out. There's some bad advice out there about never going to bed angry, when tempers are worn thin and you're both tired on top of that you're both more likely to say things which can't be taken back. Just don't invite that into your life. Learn how to get a little space when you need it, for both of you, rather than trying to force a conversation you may both regret. But likewise too, you can't let problems fester: talk about it, calmly, within 24 hours.

    The 80/20 rules.

    You should feel like you're doing 80% of the work, because she'll feel the same. You're aware of everything you're doing for her, even the behind the scenes stuff she doesn't realize. Likewise the other way around.

    On 80% of the things she does that annoy you, just learn to live with it. No one is the fantasy in your head. If you don't learn to live with a real woman, faults and all, you'll learn to live alone. That 20% though, that's what you earn by accepting the 80, some compromises have to be made to live together so if it really bothers you that much then she'll have to learn to work with you.





    " Learn how to get a little space when you need it, for both of you, rather than trying to force a conversation you may both regret. "

    This. (Sorry, I don't know how to quote)

    My husband is horrible for this. If we get into an argument, and things are heated, I stop the conversation. I need time to sort out my thoughts and feelings because I know that if I don't, I'll say something cruel. (I have Borderline Personality Disorder. I know how my mind works) I know that if I'm not left alone and feel like I've been hurt, I will say the cruelest thing I can. To make you hurt like I am.

    So, I get quiet. He tries to force a conversation. I have told him more than once, when I'm that angry, Leave. Me. Alone.

    I do NOT want to say something that will hurt him. I do NOT want to damage my relationship with him. He needs to give me space and a chance to cool off. Thankfully, arguments are far and few between. But because of my disorder, it makes them worse.

    I have learned over the years what triggers me and what I need to do to calm down and think rationally again. It's time and space

    If I say "I don't want to talk about this right now" it means I don't want to talk about this right now. It does not mean I'm avoiding the situation or trying to ignore it. It means I need to process mt thoughts and feelings so I can then approach it with a cool head.



    If you haven't been to couples counseling before, please do it. My wife and I went early, within the first year of our relationship. Most people wait until there's been a problem for a long time, serious damage has been done, and one or both partners has reached a breaking point. We went because we saw these patterns emerging and made a conscious choice not to let it control / destroy our relationship.

    I mention it because we had a very similar problem. I hate walking away from conflict and feel the need to solve it right away in the moment, even if it means things get really heated. My wife is the opposite. It took a few sessions of counseling for us to understand WHY the other person has those needs, and how to compromise in a way that de-escalates the situation for both of us. It totally changed our relationship in about six weeks. 10/10 would recommend.
