Read a LOT
Google weird things
Google is cheap. Requires no money. If you don't have time for googling hire someone else to google weird things for you! 200 years ago it would take tens of thousands of specialists in a very organized system to create similar serendipity that Google can offer today for free.

Try to spend 80% of your time creating tools to build other tools
rather than just building tools. Or even better, if you can, try to build tools for building tool-building tools. This might just be a simple combinatorial matrix spreadsheet.

Spend the first five minutes of every day preparing for when you die
If there is anything mean that you said to someone, apologize. If you have become alienated or you have estranged your children, become human. If you crave cake, plan to order it for your lunch dessert, etc. Don't live your whole day like it is your last, just the first five minutes. Then you'll always be prepared.

Just let things go unless they really matter.
Avoid Polarization
Diverse cultures should exist and the US v. Them attitude is actually really harmful. Creating the "good guy" also creates the "bad" or the "other". Don't dehumanize others by placing them on a pedestal or by tribal thinking.

Try to develop an intuition for distribution shapes and probability
Always recognize people because you like it when you are recognized
Spend wisely. Time & Thoughts.
Comfort requires forfeit of uncertainty.
Don't block your emotions.
Give them time. Just feel. Don't think and feel, but feel and later think when you are done feeling. Otherwise you are prone to flawed thinking. Humans need to feel. Feel first, then think.

You can't love someone only because they are loyal.
Loyalty is a consequence of real love. That's like loving someone because they love you.

I lose myself in this uncontrollable fantasy. I must not.
My idealized desire must always be kept in check and rooted in reality. For my imagination is but only one of that bears no merit to its hard truths. And what I seek goes far beyond the superfluous rushes of adrenaline, dopamine and endorphins.

Every second you stay alive is an accomplishment.
you still alive bae.

Drink 3 liters of water every day.
Instead of saying "No, but..." say "Yes, and..."
Befriend and love everyone. You can let them down, just don't be a traitor.
Serve people, and don't be too committed unless they are also.
Enjoy the Sabbath day.
Whatever you believe, you should plan time in your week to relax and spend time with your family.

(the exception being if you strongly believe in the anti-family... in this case you should apply GLORY TO ARSTOTZKA to your forehead 3-4 times weekly.)

Take time away from technology.
Nap. Think. Breathe.

Don't praise people for being smart.
Praise them for their hard work.

Relax for 30mins after you eat.
Just sit and read a book. You will live longer.

Take time to identify your effect on the world.
Then measure it and amplify it.

There is no race to goodness.
If not sorry...
...thank you?

Spend at least 5 minutes every day talking to those who matter the most to you.
You will regret it if something ever takes them away and it has been like a month since you really talked to them one-on-one...

Do something every day to invite inspiration and revelation into your life.
Not only meditation or prayer.

Neuroplasticity happens after ~63 days of doing something new (18 days to 254 days).

Every item must have a home and every home serves a function:

    Function by room:
        bedroom: sleeping and getting dressed
        kitchen: cooking
        dining room: eating
        living room: relaxing and entertainment
        bathroom: hygiene
        office: studying and working

    function by furniture (example for bedroom only):
        bed: sleeping
        nightstand: storing items for bedtime and morning routine
        dresser: storing clothes
        closet: storing seasonal clothes and momentos

    bedroom closet locations by function:
        left side: winter clothes
        right side: special occasion clothes
        top shelf: sentimental items

    Do this for everything. It's easier to start by location and designating its function then to look at an item and designating its home.

Zone all your objects from 1 (most used) to 5 (least used), All zone 1 objects go in the most accessible places in the room. If you have a ton of objects related to one task setup a task station with those objects (i.e. coffee station with all mugs, french press, coffee, hubby has a beard vanity with mirror, scissors, brushes, oil etc) Another example I setup a closet in my laundry room which happens to be off my bathroom. Why bother walking upstairs to my bedroom closet when all the other clothes things happen downstairs? Less used objects can go in cupboards, zone 4-5 objects go in storage. This leaves tons of space for beautiful and sentimental items
