privacy, dependence, responsibility and decision making

can we learn without opposition? can we make choices?

at the end of this life we will either be bound by God for the things we are accountable for, or we are bound by ourselves through either guilt or self-control.

how do people learn that good is better than evil and what good and evil are?

When we come on this earth we are given a unique opportunity. We can choose to reject god and fail to see him or we can choose to believe and see. I've realized now that this opportunity is less important than the consequences of it.

Sometimes we have to give up our agency, our will, in order to serve god. God may not compel us to serve Him, but He will compel us to be humble if we are not humble enough to serve.

as we increase in our gospel knowledge the more we are to account for.

will there be authentic agency in the next life if there is no opposition?

as we choose good or bad, we are compelled to continue doing good or bad. God will not compel us, so we are driven by ourselves and opposition to do good or to do bad.

I thought that free-agency was the most important thing. but it isn't. i thought that perhaps it was god's greatest gift to us or maybe he gave us something he couldn't have himself but I realized that free-agency was only given to us so we could learn and so his plan would actually work.

when people say Satan is trying to destroy our agency, they mean our freedom to choose good, to be bound to choose evil.

when they say we need to use our agency wisely they mean our freedom to choose good over evil.

people doubt when it is inconvenient to believe. people believe even if they know nothing else.

Prophets definition of agency:

1.  Old: Ability to choose between good and evil.
2.  Modern: Ability to choose good. (it's not bad that it's different, but I feel like this has changed)

Things which affect our choices:

-   Intimidation
-   Council
-   Love
-   Environment, childhood
-   Desire, appetite
-   Paranoia, worries, concerns: valid and invalid
-   persuasion, emotion
-   goals, expectations
-   contracts, agreements, previous choices
