This was originally written around 2011.

Vincent woke to a low hum. He could taste the dark dust of a container he was in. Suddenly he felt very closterphobic. Panicking, he tried to remember where he was and why he was there, but he soon felt silly for momentarily forgetting. He was in a skimmer - a hydrodynamic submarine. Vincent reached for the release handle and half fell out of the storage hold that he had slept in. Unfortunetly their living quarters had flooded, but they were lucky to find a place quiet enough to fall asleep in.

Vincent opened the hatch above his only to find it empty.

"Mark?" Vincent yelled over the sound of the modulating hum that was probably part of the engine, but Vincent was no mechanic and had no idea what the different components did or why they had to make all kinds of different loud noises.

It seemed no one was around.

Vincent turned around and opened the mini-fridge which they placed on top of a cabinet adjasent to their sleeping containers.

They were on a mission to find a lost utopia.

"Let's see what's on the menu today..." Vincent spoke to himself. He often imagined himself being written down in a book and so he began to claim his fair share of inner dialogues spoken aloud.

Vincent pulled a Sandwich #19 from the mini-fridge, out of its wrapper and into his mouth. They'd only been out ten days, but he had already grown tired of eating the same expired cold chicken sandwiches for every meal. Luckily they should be arriving soon at their destination.

The vaulted ceiling kept him from standing upright, but he had learned to squat to enjoy eating. He would've sat down, as you can imagine, a man like Vincent was a true lover of sitting down, but there was honestly no possible way to sit down in the storage area.

It would soon be Vincent's shift.

He walked outta there and into the metal stairway. Vincent himself wasn't sure why he was accepted to this program. He wasn't a scientist, no, though most his friends back at the observatory \[part of the established forced education and labor system\] were. He was head of a subcommittee... that was really his only qualification. Apparently that was enough to qualify him to leave Reynsfold and be here to collect radiation samples. Apparently they had tried sending a robot drone to collect samples and it didn't return. Vincent didn't like thinking about it, but it was the only thing to think about these days: the why.

Vincent made it to the obsdeck. Mark was with Vincent at the observatory and they were good friends, not best friends, but they understood each other. Mark trained and worked as a censor and a journalist (most of his articles were not published). Mark was the one who introduced the idea to Vincent: the idea of escaping.

"Tank 3 was open the past 20 hours." Mark said as soon as he heard Vincent crawl through the door.

"Really?–How much are do we have left?–Our plan. How does this effect our plan?" Vincent knew this changed things.

"I estimate three days less than the original remaining 13 days. That means we only have 12 hours of air-time before we have to start the return trip to Reynsfold–if we still want to go back."

"That much huh? We haven't even made it to our destination coordinates. How far away are we now?" asked Vincent.

"We're pretty far out"

"That's pretty far out man"

Ooouuuu aaahhh ouuuu....
