6/25

    Pen to paper;
    I want to make something 
               dark. muddy. profound & notable. 
          something that has "me" inside of it 
               am I profound & notable? 
               do we not all live lives full of trial and unclear motives? 
               victims of our own fallen state? 
                    violently grasping for our own happiness? 
               succumbing blindly to the chaotic result billions upon billions of electrons attracted and repelled, chemical reactions malified, the rush and fall of biological processes and even higher, undiscovered, interpersonal systems which we have yet to recognize. 
          are we above such systems? 
          can we escape? 
     or could we ever hope to escape? 
                    yes. I believe there is reason to have such hope:
                       nature continuesly pusheth, but we have not gave way. 
                 thousands even. if only blindly 
                        turning away :: rejecting nature 
                as if to turn back at the end of a long journey only
                         to shout in the face of the journey itself. 
                    but wait
                    was there even some destination? 
                          this pure hope fuels us to do all things 
              but not all things are to be done. 
                           however, we need not undo ourselves 
             nor re-fuse ourselves. 
                            but to refuse ourselves that which we cannot afford 
            are we not all placed in a law? 
            a yoke which we cannot hope to escape. 
                    passions be bridled; but wait 
                              are we rewriting this natural contract? 
                              disowning nature and praising technology 
         do we wait for an answer? 
                               are we asking the right questions? 
         do we even wait at all? 
        nature, always crafting and planning, never sleeps. 
                                have we conquered nature or
       have we ever left? 
                                 our closest friend
      our wrathest enemy
                                  have we left nature or
     could we ever replace it? 
                                   our wrathest enemy 
    our closest friend 
                                    each one of us
