market plus



users enter their activity, how long it takes them, how much they earn per hour (optional)

by default it will use an adjusted minimum wage for the region they are in or select

for example

after poop wiping:

currently using toilet paper it takes 2mins to buy per month, 40seconds every time a roll is empty to replace on the roll, 5 seconds to wipe, it costs $0.30 per roll which is 3mins of working at work: total time is 2mins/number of uses per buy,+ 40seconds/number of uses per roll, + 5sec + cost/number of uses per roll == some number of seconds.

OPTIONS which are cheaper:

water wipe, $ initial investment, Quality of Life effects, number of uses before investment is payed off, side effects, how often replace, total time saved per month, year, lifetime OR total cost saved per month, year.

Automatic recurring investment and diversification

Automatic Distribution to both Companies and Welfare Recipients

The stock market embedded inside the monetary system

moneyA

moneyB

Anybody can change the relative value of their moneyB. Similar to how a company can authorize the creation of new shares of their stock to devalue the price everybody can adjust all of the technical aspects of their currency.

Each person can have as many moneyB accounts as they want, but they can only have one moneyA account. Companies and organizations can also only have one moneyA account but they can manage and create sub-accounts which restrict access by percentage.

Billionaires no longer exist but it's still possible for

Like epoxy you need both types to form a transaction.

The stock market embedded inside the monetary system. Taxes embedded in the monetary system. Welfare embedded in the monetary system.

A livable daily wage can be permanently fixed at 100 moneyA. moneyB will allow moneyA to maintain the same relative value for goods and services (including FX and exchange to non-digital currency). The value of moneyB can be highly volatile but the relative construct if its implementation is it's own counterweight so that it will always tend to return to the average historical value in relation to outside currencies.

Like epoxy you need both types to form a transaction. A transaction destroys moneyA. moneyB is what the seller receives.

When the government spends money, it's really spending real resources. E.g. if the government builds a road, it needs things like gravel, concrete, bulldozers, labour, etc. When the government transfers resources, say to the poor, they need real resources like food and shelter and the like. There are excellent practical reasons why modern governments achieve this redistribution by taxing and then spending money instead of direct requisition, but its still a transfer of real resources (money as a medium of exchange). Printing money doesn't make any more gravel, concrete, food etc.

stagflation is prevented to some degree because the national or local government also have moneyB accounts. They can devalue their own money to increase their spending power temporarily--similar to how the federal reserve uses repo agreements, interest rates, and reserve requirements to allow banks to lend more money the difference being everyone can do it.

moneyA can be purchased with moneyB with a floating exchange rate (moneyA is created from destroyed moneyB). moneyA decays. moneyA cannot be invested with but it must be used in every sale to make a transaction binding. For example, when buying a large multimillion dollar house there would be a mechanism to automatically convert the required amount of moneyA. Instead of hefty "transaction fee" it is more like property tax.

Every person recieves a daily universal income of 100 moneyA. A full-time minimum wage job would be another 100 moneyA.

moneyB cannot be bought by moneyA. moneyA can only be sold by the system. Any other transaction destroys moneyA.

Digital currency idea which solves income disparity to an nth degree:

moneyA + moneyB is required by a certain proportion in every transfer/transaction. moneyA is permanent. moneyB is "destroyed" in every transaction. When a person buys something the seller receives the portion of moneyA and the buyer recieves a small amount of moneyB created and distributed by the system.

People only have access to one personal account their entire life and it generates a certain amount of moneyB every x amount of time.

(People/organizations could have "business" accounts which store moneyA and moneyB but they don't spontaneously generate moneyB.)

The proportion of moneyA to moneyB required for each transaction might need to be adjusted as more people are born or it might not?

normal currency is like moving around blobs of objects. ideal currency would be closer to spinning a vast interconnected web of reciprocity.

moneyB is dynamic. The average geolocation of the users who share similar moneyB settings form an optimal currency area. If people want to raise prices in their store they don't need to individually adjust prices they only need to modify some of their cash register's moneyB settings to make it more valuable relative to other moneyB. The customer does not see moneyA or moneyB. Evertyhing is abstracted away into a single value: either an index based on their daily wage, or an external currency.

distribute trust without having to distribute infrastructure

moneyA is controlled by each government and audited by an intergovernmental organization.

moneyB is both completely global but also highly local as each person has the ability to tweak every aspect of their moneyB currency per moneyB account. When automatically managed then the system continuously builds and adjusts the optimal currency area by analyzing and clustering transactions.

The goal of moneyB is to achieve low and stable inflation in a global currency but allow for optimization to local business cycles.

demurrage between 0.3 and 15%. there are benefits and consequences for both buyer and seller when deviating from whatever the global average is. Global average should be kept between 2 and 6 percent.

higher demurrage transactions require slightly less moneyA.

moneyA expires much more quickly than moneyB.

The power of the internet is its distribution not necissarily its decentralization.

We are not limited to only two money-parts. It might make sense to try to capture historically externalized costs.

moneyA tries to solve the problem of extreme inequality and relative poverty.

moneyB tries to solve the problem of economic stability and currency interoperability (forex).

moneyC could try to solve the problem of capturing ecological and/or environmental costs which have historically not been paid for. moneyC is reinvestment into natural capital.

eBay-like transparency for any customer to look at the aggregated balance sheet of the account which they bought/sold.



https://snowdrift.coop/how-it-works  # How it Works — Snowdrift.coop

https://medium.com/ted-hunt/why-i-refrained-from-minting-my-work-as-nfts-and-created-my-own-protocol-instead-1b929b0e96c4  # Why I refrained from minting my work as NFT’s and created my own protocol instead. | by Ted Hunt | ted-hunt | Medium

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ecological_economics  # Ecological economics - Wikipedia

https://cseweb.ucsd.edu/~goguen/courses/171sp02/lanier.agents.html  # Lanier

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Georgism  # Georgism - Wikipedia

Related to my ABTAME idea: https://unli.xyz/p/2016/ABTAME.pdf

https://drive.google.com/file/d/1UyqFX3zKHOkBlM0M5ggrmYjqa5WxtkRo/view  # 190328_gods_2.pdf - Google Drive

https://unli.xyz/p/2016/ABTAME.pdf  # https://unli.xyz/p/2016/ABTAME.pdf
