The main thing that distinguishes the 21st century from the 22nd is the abundance of minds.

The first to merger were the billíonaire classes. By 2120 the benefits were obvious: survival and gaurenteed precedence. No more infighting and petty wars. Full alignment at the cost of total identity.

It wasn't obvious to anyone that this had been going on--until the technology was independently invented and available to everyone. The richest minds already consolidated into a single mind but they used several days of "re-identification" to slightly prefer their originating persona.

Of course, a lot about identity is tied to what you believe. It's difficult to continue some behaviors even as charade when you _know_ that some alternative knowledge are more true.

The loss of languages was the first indicator that we would accept some mental consolidation if it meant closer cooperation between communities. It came in the form of educational packs. Just play the tapes and you'll learn 1-6th grade math. Just play the tapes and you'll understand the 300 most common languages on Earth. Just play the tapes and you'll have the lived experience of all the living philosophers and anthropologists...

It was jealousy and envy thar drove the incestuous consolidation of our richest class, but for the rest of us it was economics. Why pay thousands of dollars for your youngest child to "study" ethnomusicology when his older brother already had several PhDs in it? Just merge the backup cassettes of both children. "Home school" is free.

It didn't take long for mind-swapping and mass merging to become popular. We all wanted memories to long for and experiences to cherish but by the time the climate shifted international travel became a luxury that few could afford. It was cheaper to "play" the Bahamas tape and you could have 1,000 man-years of travel memories from the time that the ocean was gentle.

There is little conflict and little crime within the populous class. But the class above us remains ruthless and determined to take the earth for their own.
