2013

I was a little disappointed I wasn't going to be able to attend BYU, but I was excited and extremely fortunate to be able to go to school at Snow. My parents still owned the bed & breakfast in Spring City and I was able to live there and not pay for housing in agreement that I take care of the grounds and the dogs.

I got a job working at the library. It was a lot of fun and allowed me to focus on getting my homework done.

2014

Multicopters and FPV sparked my interest and I started reading and learning about how to build and fly remote controlled flying machines. I spent about $500+ on materials and I proceeded to put everything together. It was a failure. It couldn't get off the ground for some reason. Maybe it was too heavy... I decided I had already spent enough money on it and it was likely to much more difficult than I had anticipated. I was able to sell the parts which I had acquired and it didn't leave too much money in the hole. Then I started reading about the GWS Slowstick airplane and I bought two of them... I was not able to get it to fly for very long. I think the center of gravity was off... I would like to try making it again in the future.

At this same time, I was doing special assignments at my job in the library. I put together the digital collection of the Snowonian yearbook.

I ordered 200+ mail tubes from USPS accidentally. :( They were send it packs on 10. I only needed 23. This was close to the end of the semester and I was getting ready to serve a mission.

I flew back to Missouri and the request of my parents. We packed up everything and moved their things to their new fixer-upper in Nauvoo, IL. On the drive back to Utah my mom called and said my mission call letter had arrived and I asked her to open it and she read to me where I would be living and serving for the next two years of my life.

Before leaving to the Philippines I helped my dad sand floors in the granary, finish Cooper's Cabin, plant grass in the pasture, and stop a catastrophic main-line gas leak. I also worked with Chris to develop buildbutler, worked with Abe in his shop and his studio under the piano gallery in Provo.
