Sol Stein’s advice:

Before beginning to write

What does your protagonist want badly? Is it a desire that readers will be able to understand/identify with?

Who or what is in your protagonist’s way? “Who” will be more dramatic.

Write a character sketch of the main players that has much more detail than you are likely to use.

Get into the skin of characters who are different from you.

Why would you want to spend a lot of time in the company of the person you are choosing as your protagonist?

How do your characters view each other? Write a short paragraph about each character’s view of the virtues, faults, and follies of the other important characters. Save these paragraphs for referral and guidance.

Which character’s point of view will dominate?

How are you planning to hook the reader’s attention on page one?

Consider starting with a scene that is already underway.

What are the dramatic conflicts you intend to let the reader see in each chapter?

Keep in mind while writing

The “engine” of your story needs to be turned on as close to the beginning as possible. The “engine” is the point at which a story involves the reader, the place at which the reader can’t stop reading.
Keep the action visible on stage as much as you can.
Don’t mark time; move the story relentlessly.
Is your hero/heroine actively doing something rather than having something done to them?
Substitute concrete detail for abstractions and generalizations.
Use surprise, such as an unexpected obstacle, to create suspense.
In dialogue, change perfectly formed sentences.
Break up long speeches.
Make exchanges of dialogue provocative, argumentative, combative.
Characterize through speech. Give different characters different speech patterns.
Have something visual on every page.
Don’t tell us how your characters feel. Let the reader draw his conclusions from what each character says or does.
Don’t resolve problems too quickly. It kills suspense.
Are you working on the emotions of the reader?
Are the obstacles facing the protagonist/s getting tougher as the story progresses?
Have you put your characters under stress?
Is their dialogue more revealing under stress?
Are you sticking to a consistent point of view?
Avoid summarizing unless absolutely necessary. Keep summaries very short.
Use sound, smell, and touch as well as sight.
During your descriptions of places, do you also move the story along?
End scenes and chapters with thrusters that make the reader curious about what happens next.
To increase the reader’s interest, deprive them of something they want to know.

Revising drafts

Fix major problems first.
Cut flab, echoes, nonessential adjectives and adverbs.
Check whether you’ve given your protagonist a flaw, a vulnerability.
Have you made your villain charming, interesting, strong?
If someone told you what your characters are doing, would you find those actions credible?
Is each character’s motivation credible?
Are your characters revealing themselves, or are you doing it for them?
Cut down/break up any speech that runs longer than three sentences.
If your characters usually speak in complete sentences, revise.
Are responses in dialogue oblique rather than direct?
Have you used “he said” and “she said” instead of substitutes that describe how the words are said? Let the words and word order tell us how they were said.
Is there any dialogue you can make more confrontational or adversarial?
Delete flab to increase pace and tension.
Cut/cut down the narrative between scenes.
Have you made every word count?
Test every use of “very” to see if the adjective or adverb is strengthened if the “very” is cut.
If you’ve said something twice in different ways, pick the better one and cut the other.
Are there any images or sentences you really love that don’t belong in this work? Kill them.
If you’ve repeated the same noun or adjective more than once on the same page, go for your thesaurus?
Have you been ruthless in your cliché hunt?
Might your story end differently?
Have you been careful to avoid disimproving anything? If in doubt, leave it alone.

• Everybody tells me I need to grab the reader’s attention on page one. How do I do it without first describing the setting and what the character looks like?

Show the character in action, preferably doing something that is important to the character. In the course of doing that – without stopping the story – give the reader a quick glimpses of the most striking aspect of the setting as you show the action. For the character’s physical appearance, single out an attribute that is not conventional, that conveys something about the person in a writerly way. For instance, “Carole’s stammer didn’t detract from her elegance.” Or, “George came through the door like a truck ready to run you over.” Leave room for the reader’s imagination. You can use another characteristic later on in the action, but never stop the story to provide a laundry list of clothing items worn or use clichéd characteristics like broad shoulders. Try to use characteristics that relate to your story, as in “he dealt with his friends as if they were employees,” or “as he moved slowly across the room, age and arthritis made him seem brittle, but when he spoke – anywhere about anything – people stopped to listen as if Moses had come down with new commandments.”

• How can I create surprises that readers like?

Think of the likely logical result of what the reader is witnessing, and have the opposite happen! Be sure the surprise is credible and motivated.

• My dialogue sounds stilted at times. What can I do to liven it up?

Don’t use complete sentences, don’t let most characters sound logical, keep it to no more than three sentences at a time. Dialogue is an exchange. Adversarial dialogue is best. Dialogue is a new language, and takes long to learn.

• What constitutes a chapter in a novel? How can I know when I’ve come to what should be the end of a chapter?

A chapter consists of one or more scenes, and preferably little else. Always end your chapter with something that raises the reader’s curiosity as to what will happen next, and that thrusts him into the next chapter. As to the beginning of the next chapter, never take the reader where the reader wants to go.

• Someone whose opinion of my writing I trust keeps saying that my leading character seems ordinary. How can I make him/her more interesting?

Give them an unusual characteristic, preferably one that relates to the story. Give them a strong want. She runs to the mailbox every day. What she’s expecting hasn’t come yet. You’d notice her in a pack of people because of the special way they do their hair, or the way they dress. Imagine which of their characteristics would make you want to go off on a two-week vacation with hem.

• The novels I like best keep me turning the pages, but when I read my own stuff, after a while it doesn’t keep me turning pages. Is it because I wrote it? If not, how can I put a page-turning quality into my writing?

Keep raising the reader’s curiosity and don’t gratify it right away.

• I’m told there are parts of my plot that don’t seem credible. It seems okay to me, so how do I fix it?

Writers are not usually good judges of what does or does not come across as credible in their own work. Examine the actions that raise questions as to their credibility. Is that something you would do? Under what circumstances? Is the person doing the action sufficiently motivated? Is there a hyperbolic or cartoonish quality to the action that was questioned? Make it realistic. One of the most successful writers I (Sol Stein) ever edited had one character throwing another character over a railing. Want to bet? Lifting a person of 170 pounds is a wrestler’s job. Eliminate or change actions that are not credible when you examine them closely. Retaining not-quite-credible actions is the sign of a hack or laziness.

• What’s the “envelope”, and why do some writers think it’s so important?

When you give an envelope in the mail, the return address may give you a clue as to its contents. The envelope in fiction is like that. It gives your imagination something to put particulars into. “Grandma sat staring out the window” is visual, devoid of particulars, but from the context, the reader will imagine what she might be seeing.

• What’s wrong with using flashbacks to convey a character’s background or events that happened before the story starts?

Flashbacks require a great deal of experience to be handled unobtrusively and expertly. Most flashback material can be brought into the present. If a flashback is absolutely necessary, segue into it as quickly and unobtrusively as possible, and treat the flashback itself as if it were in the present.

• If the story is more important than the title, why is there so much fuss about getting a good title before submitting a manuscript?

The title is the door to your book. A good-enough title will encourage readers to pick up a book and read the flaps.

• I keep hearing my novel needs more actions. Personally, I hate action movies, car chases, other stuff like that. Why do I have to have more action?

You are misinterpreting the meaning of action as it is used in fiction. An exchange of dialogue is an action. Hesitating is an action. Looking away is an action.

• I had a teacher who kept yakking about “diction” giving quality to a story. I thought diction meant how you pronounce a word correctly. What’s that got to do with writing or quality?

Diction as used by writers has nothing to do with pronunciation. It has everything to do with selecting the precise, fitting word or image every time. That’s what gives a story quality, and a writer a reputation for it.

• I feel caught between a rock and a hard place. I know my drafts are too wordy, but if I cut a lot of words out of my manuscript, it always makes it seem too short. What should I do?

Almost all novels by newcomers that I see in manuscript are too long for what they do. Editors are experienced in cutting drafts, but publishers find that process costly. And paper is the most costly ingredient in a book. Hence, these days at least, shorter is better. Many of the novels I mention in this book are shorter than average. My advice is to cut all unnecessary words, especially adverbs and adjectives, and you’ll see the pace of your work automatically speed up. A great way to tighten a manuscript is to cut out the worst scene. That will leave you with another scene is now the worst. Study it. That scene may be worth cutting, too. Eliminating the weakest or unnecessary scenes always strengthens a book.
