Text taken from a google doc written by somebody else...

    Black Sheep Cafe
    DP Cheesesteaks - Mushroom Pepper is amazing and classic, get jalapeno sauce, you won’t regret it
    Wild Ginger - good all-you-can-eat sushi for lunch, and they even do dumpling as part of it
    Thai Village - found this one rather late, get the red curry or the pad thai. (I prefer red curry)
    Cubby’s - get the houdini, regular tri-tip sandwich, or a salad. I know, salads are for weenies, but this place has amazing salads.
    Cafe Rio - Classic. Pork burrito is timeless
    Rancherito’s (sometimes called Beto’s) - Really big, cheap, tasty breakfast burritos
    Pho Plus - Pretty good vietnamese soup place
    Some place on Center street has pupusas something something el savador
    Hruska’s kolaches - Closes when they run out, so go early. 
    Bam Bam’s BBQ - never had it, heard amazing things.
    Hospital - yeah, it’s weird, but the food can sometimes be pretty dang good.
    Food truck Round-up - Happens Thursday nights down by Devmountain and the startup building. 
    Sweeto Burrito - Food truck that has amazing burritos
    Fiore Pizza - Food truck, ask for Will Grout. He was might roommate. Might hook you up with a free pizza.
    180 Tacos - funky small street tacos with tastes from around the world. Pretty spendy though. 
    Sam Hawk - get the bulgogi, it’s a pile of korean barbecue, and it’s good. The side potatoes are amazing as well.
    SLAB Pizza - It’s ok, not great
    J-dawgs - you will have plenty of this without going, but they are actually hot dogs I like.
    Cupbop - pretty good food. Try anything that looks good.
    Costco - is actually an amazing place to go for food (PIzza!) as well as groceries. Get a membership
    Black Jack Pizza - good place, worth the little extra $ over little Caesars.
    Kneaders - all-you-can-eat french toast for breakfast is only ok. Sandwiches are good though
    Cafe 300 - great place for traditional breakfast. The french toast is massive and tasty.
    Bombay House
    Sushi-Ya 
    Wild Ginger
